1:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Rejoice, sons and daughters, in the name of the Lord who loved us, in peace.
1:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Seeing that the ordinances of God are great and rich unto you, I rejoice with an exceeding great and overflowing joy at your blessed and glorious spirits; so innate is the grace of the spiritual gift that you have received.
1:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Why also I the more congratulate myself hoping to be saved, for that I truly see the Spirit poured out among you from the riches of the fount of the Lord. So greatly did the much-desired sight of you astonish me respecting you.
1:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Being therefore persuaded of this, and being conscious with myself that having said much among you I know that the Lord journeyed with me on the way of righteousness, and am wholly constrained also myself to this, to love you more than my own soul (for great faith and love dwells in you through the hope of the life which is His)–considering this therefore, that,
1:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN if it shall be my care to communicate to you some portion of that which I received, it shall turn to my reward for having ministered to such spirits, I was eager to send you a trifle, that along with your faith you might have your knowledge also perfect.
1:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Well then, there are three ordinances of the Lord; the hope of life, which is the beginning and end of our faith; and righteousness, which is the beginning and end of judgment; love shown in gladness and exultation, the testimony of works of righteousness.
1:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For the Lord made known to us by His prophets things past and present, giving us likewise the firstfruits of the taste of things future. And seeing each of these things severally coming to pass, according as He spoke, we ought to offer a richer and higher offering to the fear of Him.
1:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But I, not as though I were a teacher, but as one of yourselves, will show forth a few things, whereby you shall be gladdened in the present circumstances.
2:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Seeing then that the days are evil, and that the Active One himself has the authority, we ought to give heed to ourselves and to seek out the ordinances of the Lord.
2:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN The aids of our faith then are fear and patience, and our allies are long-suffering and self-restraint.
2:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN While these abide in a pure spirit in matters relating to the Lord, wisdom, understanding, science, knowledge rejoice with them.
2:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For He has made manifest to us by all the prophets that He wants neither sacrifices nor whole burnt offerings nor oblations, saying at one time;
2:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN What to Me is the multitude of your sacrifices, says the Lord I am full of whole burnt-offerings, and the fat of lambs and the blood of bulls and of goats desire not, not though you should come to be seen of Me. or who required these things at your hands? You shall continue no more to tread My court. If you bring fine flour, it is in vain; incense is an abomination to Me; your new moons and your Sabbaths I cannot away with.
2:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN These things therefore He annulled, that the new law of our Lord Jesus Christ, being free from the yoke of constraint, might have its oblation not made by human hands.
2:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And He says again unto them; Did I command your fathers when they went forth from the land of Egypt to bring Me whole burnt offerings and sacrifices?
2:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN No, this was My command unto them, Let none of you bear a grudge of evil against his neighbor in his heart, and love you not a false oath.
2:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN So we ought to perceive, unless we are without understanding, the mind of the goodness of our Father; for He speaks to us, desiring us not to go astray like them but to seek how we may approach Him.
2:10:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Thus then speaks He to us; The sacrifice unto God is a broken heart, the smell of a sweet savor unto the Lord is a heart that glorifies its Maker. We ought therefore, brethren, to learn accurately concerning our salvation, lest the Evil One having effected an entrance of error in us should fling us away from our life.
3:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN He speaks again therefore to them concerning these things; Why do you fast for Me, says the Lord, so that your voice is heard this day crying aloud? This is not the fast which have chosen, says the Lord; not a man abasing his soul;
3:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN not though you should bend your neck as a hoop, and put on sackcloth and make your bed of ashes, not even so shall you call a fast that is acceptable.
3:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But unto us He says; Behold, this is the fast which I have chosen, says the Lord; loosen every band of wickedness, untie the tightened cords of forcible contracts, send away the broken ones released and tear in pieces every unjust bond. Break your bread to the hungry, and if you see one naked clothe him; bring the shelterless into your house, and if you see a humble man, you shall not despise him, neither shall any one of your household and of your own seed.
3:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Then shall your light break forth in the morning, and your healing shall arise quickly, and righteousness shall go forth before your face, and the glory of God shall environ you.
3:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Then shall you cry out and God shall hear you; while you are still speaking, He shall say 'Lo, I am here'; if you shall take away from you the yoke and the stretching forth of the finger and the word of murmuring, and shall give your bread to the hungry heartily, and shall pity the abased soul.
3:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN To this end therefore, my brethren, He that is long-suffering, foreseeing that the people whom He had prepared in His well-beloved would believe in simplicity, manifested to us beforehand concerning all things, that we might not as novices shipwreck ourselves upon their law.
4:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN It behooves us therefore to investigate deeply concerning the present, and to search out the things which have power to save us. Let us therefore flee altogether from all the works of lawlessness, lest the works of lawlessness overpower us; and let us loathe the error of the present time, that we may be loved for that which is to come.
4:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Let us give no relaxation to our soul that it should have liberty to consort with sinners and wicked men, lest perhaps we be made like unto them.
4:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN The last offence is at hand, concerning which the scripture speaks, as Enoch says. For to this end the Master has cut the seasons and the days short, that His beloved might hasten and come to His inheritance.
4:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And the prophet also speaks in this way; Ten kingdoms shall reign upon the earth, and after them shall arise another king, who shall bring low three of the kings under one.
4:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN In like manner Daniel speaks concerning the same; And I saw the fourth beast to be wicked and strong and more intractable than all the beasts of the earth, and how there arose from him ten horns, and from these a little horn and excrescence, and how that it abased under one three of the great horns.
4:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You ought therefore to understand. Moreover I ask you this one thing besides, as being one of yourselves and loving you all in particular more than my own soul, to give heed to yourselves now, and not to liken yourselves to certain persons who pile up sin upon sin, saying that our covenant remains to them also.
4:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Ours it is; but they lost it in this way for ever, when Moses had just received it. For the scripture says; And Moses was in the mountain fasting forty days and forty nights, and he received the covenant from the Lord, even tablets of stone written with the finger of the hand of the Lord.
4:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But they lost it by turning unto idols. For thus says the Lord; Moses, Moses, come down quickly; for your people whom you brought out of the land of Egypt has done unlawfully. And Moses understood, and threw the two tables from his hands; and their covenant was broken in pieces, that the covenant of the beloved Jesus might be sealed unto our hearts in the hope which springs from faith in Him.
4:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But though I would fain write many things, not as a teacher, but as becomes one who loves you not to fall short of that which we possess, I was anxious to write to you, being your devoted slave. Why let us take heed in these last days. For the whole time of our faith shall profit us nothing, unless we now, in the season of lawlessness and in the offenses that shall be, as becomes sons of God, offer resistance, that the Black One may not effect an entrance.
4:10:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Let us flee from all vanity, let us entirely hate the works of the evil way. Do not entering in privily stand apart by yourselves, as if you were already justified, but assemble yourselves together and consult concerning the common welfare.
4:11:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For the scripture says; Woe unto them who are wise for themselves, and understanding in their own sight. Let us become spiritual, let us become a temple perfect unto God. As far as in us lies, let us exercise ourselves in the fear of God, [and] let us strive to keep His commandments, that we may rejoice in His ordinances.
4:12:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN The Lord judges the world without respect of persons; each man shall receive according to his deeds. If he be good, his righteousness shall go before him in the way; if he be evil, the recompense of his evil-doing is before him; lest perhaps,
4:13:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN if we relax as men that are called, we should slumber over our sins, and the prince of evil receive power against us and thrust us out from the kingdom of the Lord.
4:14:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Moreover understand this also, my brothers. When you see that after so many signs and wonders wrought in Israel, even then they were abandoned, let us give heed, lest perhaps we be found, as the scripture says, many are called but few are chosen.
5:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For to this end the Lord endured to deliver His flesh unto corruption, that by the remission of sins we might be cleansed, which cleansing is through the blood of His sprinkling.
5:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For the scripture concerning Him containeth some things relating to Israel, and some things relating to us. And it speaks thus; He was wounded for our transgressions, and He has been bruised for our sins; by His stripes we were healed. As a sheep He was led to slaughter, as a lamb is dumb before his shearer.
5:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN We ought therefore to be very thankful unto the Lord, for that He both revealed unto us the past, and made us wise in the present, and as regards the future we are not without understanding.
5:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Now the scripture says; Not unjustly is the net spread for the birds. He means this that a man shall justly perish, who having the knowledge of the way of righteousness forces himself into the way of darkness.
5:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN There is yet this also, my brethren; if the Lord endured to suffer for our souls, though He was Lord of the whole world, unto whom God said from the foundation of the world, Let us make man after our image and likeness, how then did He endure to suffer at the hand of men?
5:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Understand. The prophets, receiving grace from Him, prophesied concerning Him. But He Himself endured that He might destroy death and show forth the resurrection of the dead, for that He must needs be manifested in the flesh;
5:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN that at the same time He might redeem the promise made to the fathers, and by preparing the new people for Himself might show, while He was on earth, that having brought about the resurrection He will Himself exercise judgment.
5:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Yes and further, He preached teaching Israel and performing so many wonders and miracles, and He loved him exceedingly.
5:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And when He chose His own apostles who were to proclaim His Gospel, who that He might show that He came not to call the righteous but sinners were sinners above every sin, then He manifested Himself to be the Son of God.
5:10:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For if He had not come in the flesh neither would men have looked upon Him and been saved, forasmuch as when they look upon the sun that shall cease to be, which is the work of His own hands, they cannot face its rays.
5:11:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Therefore the Son of God came in the flesh to this end, that He might sum up the complete tale of their sins against those who persecuted and killed His prophets.
5:12:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN To this end therefore He endured. For God says of the wounds of His flesh that they came from them; When they shall smite their own shepherd, then shall the sheep of the flock be lost.
5:13:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But He Himself desired so to suffer; for it was necessary for Him to suffer on a tree. For he who prophesied said concerning Him, Spare My soul form the sword; and, Pierce My flesh with nails, for the congregations of evil-doers have risen up against Me.
5:14:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And again He says; Behold I have given My back to stripes, and My cheeks to smitings, and My face did I set as a hard rock.
6:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN When then He gave the commandment, what says He? Who is he who disputes with Me? Let him oppose Me. Or who is he who goes to law with Me? Let him draw nigh unto the servant of the Lord,
6:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Woe unto you, for you all shall wax old as a garment, and the moth shall consume you. And again the prophet says, seeing that as a hard stone He was ordained for crushing; Behold I will put into the fountains of Zion a stone very precious, elect, a chief corner-stone, honorable.
6:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Then again what says He; And whosoever shall set his hope on Him, shall live forever. Is our hope then set upon a stone? Far be it. But it is because the Lord has set His flesh in strength. For He says; And He set Me as a hard rock.
6:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And the prophet says again; The stone which the builders rejected, this became the head and the corner. And again He says; This is the great and wonderful day, which the Lord made.
6:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN I write to you the more simply, that you may understand, I who am the offscouring of your love.
6:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN What then says the prophet again? The assembly of evildoers gathered around Me, they surrounded Me as bees surround a comb; and; For My garment they cast a lot.
6:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Forasmuch then as He was about to be manifested in the flesh and to suffer, His suffering was manifested beforehand. For the prophet says concerning Israel; Woe unto their soul, for they have counseled evil counsel against themselves saying, Let us bind the righteous one, for he is unprofitable for us.
6:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN What says the other prophet Moses unto them? Behold, these things says the Lord God; enter into the good land which the Lord swear unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and inherit it, a land flowing with milk and honey.
6:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But what says knowledge? Understand. Set your hope on Him who is about to be manifested to you in the flesh, even Jesus. For man is earth suffering; for from the face of the earth came the creation of Adam.
6:10:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN What then says He? Into the good land, a land flowing with milk and honey. Blessed is our Lord, brethren, who established among us wisdom and understanding of His secret things. For the prophet speaks a parable concerning the Lord. Who shall comprehend, save he who is wise and prudent and that loves his Lord?
6:11:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Forasmuch then as He renewed us in the remission of sins, He made us to be a new type, so that we should have the soul of children, as if He were recreating us.
6:12:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For the scripture says concerning us, how He says to the Son; Let us make man after our image and after our likeness, and let them rule over the beasts of the earth and the fowls of the heaven and the fishes of the sea. And the Lord said when He saw the fair creation of us men; Increase and multiply and fill the earth. These words refer to the Son.
6:13:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Again I will show you how the Lord speaks concerning us. He made a second creation at the last; and the Lord says; Behold I make the last things as the first. In reference to this then the prophet preached; Enter into a land flowing with milk and honey, and be lords over it.
6:14:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Behold then we have been created anew, as He says again in another prophet; Behold, says the Lord, I will take out from these, that is to say, from those whom the Spirit of the Lord foresaw, their stony hearts, and will put into them hearts of flesh; for He Himself was to be manifested in the flesh and to dwell in us.
6:15:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For a holy temple unto the Lord, my brethren, is the abode of our heart.
6:16:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For the Lord says again; For wherein shall I appear unto the Lord my God and be glorified? I will make confession unto You in the assembly of my brethren, and I will sing unto You in the midst of the assembly of the saints. We therefore are they whom He brought into the good land.
6:17:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN What then is the milk and the honey Because the child is first kept alive by honey, and then by milk. So in like manner we also, being kept alive by our faith in the promise and by the word, shall live and be lords of the earth.
6:18:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Now we have already said above; And let them increase and multiply and rule over the fishes. But who is he who is able [now] to rule over beasts and fishes and fowls of the heaven; for we ought to perceive that to rule implieth power, so that one should give orders and have dominion.
6:19:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN If then this comes not to pass now, assuredly He spoke to us for the hereafter, when we ourselves shall be made perfect so that we may become heirs of the covenant of the Lord.
7:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Understand therefore, children of gladness, that the good Lord manifested all things to us beforehand, that we might know to whom we ought in all things to render thanksgiving and praise.
7:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN If then the Son of God, being Lord and future Judge of quick and dead, suffered that His wound might give us life, let us believe that the Son of God could not suffer except for our sakes.
7:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But moreover when crucified He had vinegar and gall given Him to drink. Hear how on this matter the priests of the temple have revealed. Seeing that there is a commandment in scripture, Whatsoever shall not observe the fast shall surely die, the Lord commanded, because He was in His own person about to offer the vessel of His Spirit a sacrifice for our sins, that the type also which was given in Isaac who was offered upon the alter should be fulfilled.
7:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN What then says He in the prophet? And let them eat of the goat that is offered at the fast for all their sins. Attend carefully; And let all the priests alone eat the entrails unwashed with vinegar.
7:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Why? Since you are to give Me, who am to offer My flesh for the sins of My new people, gall with vinegar to drink, eat you alone, while the people fasts and lament in sackcloth and ashes; that He might show that He must suffer at their hands.
7:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Attend to the commandments which He gave. Take two goats, fair and alike, and offer them, and let the priest take the one for a whole burnt offering for sins.
7:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But the other one–what must they do with it? Accursed, says He, is the one. Give heed how the type of Jesus is revealed.
7:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And do you all spit upon it and goad it, and place scarlet wool about its head, and so let it be cast into the wilderness. And when it is so done, he who takes the goat into the wilderness leads it, and takes off the wool, and puts it upon the branch which is called Rachia, the same whereof we are inclined to eat the shoots when we find them in the country. Of this briar alone is the fruit thus sweet.
7:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN What then means this? Give heed. The one at the altar, and the other accursed. And moreover the accursed one crowned. For they shall see Him in that day wearing the long scarlet robe about His flesh, and shall say, Is not this He, Whom once we crucified and set at nought and spat upon; verily this was He, Who then said that He was the Son of God.
7:10:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For how is He like the goat? For this reason it says the goats shall be fair and alike, that, when they shall see Him coming then, they may be astonished at the likeness of the goat. Therefore behold the type of Jesus that was to suffer.
7:11:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But what means it, that they place the wool in the midst of the thorns? It is a type of Jesus set forth for the Church, since whosoever should desire to take away the scarlet wool it behoved him to suffer many things owing to the terrible nature of the thorn, and through affliction to win the mastery over it. Thus, He says, they that desire to see Me, and to attain unto My kingdom, must lay hold on Me through tribulation and affliction.
8:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But what do you think the type means, where the commandment is given to Israel that those men, whose sins are full grown, offer an heifer and slaughter and burn it, and then that the children take up the ashes, and cast them into vessels, and twist the scarlet wool on a tree (see here again is the type of the cross and the scarlet wool), and the hyssop, and that this done the children should sprinkle the people one by one, that they may be purified from their sins?
8:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Understand how in all plainness it is spoken unto you; the calf is Jesus, the men that offer it, being sinners, are they who offered Him for the slaughter. After this it is no more men (who offer); the glory is no more for sinners.
8:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN The children who sprinkle are they who preached unto us the forgiveness of sins and the purification of our heart, they to whom, being twelve in number for a testimony unto the tribes (for there are twelve tribes of Israel), He gave authority over the Gospel, that they should preach it.
8:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But why are the children who sprinkle three in number? For a testimony unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, because these are mighty before God.
8:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Then there is the placing the wool on the tree. This means that the kingdom of Jesus is on the cross, and that they who set their hope on Him shall live for ever.
8:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And why is there the wool and the hyssop at the same time? Because in His kingdom there shall be evil and foul days, in which we shall be saved; for he who suffers pain in the flesh is healed through the foulness of the hyssop.
8:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Now to us indeed it is manifest that these things so befell for this reason, but to them they were dark, because they heard not the voice of the Lord.
9:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Furthermore He says concerning the ears, how that it is our heart which He circumcised. The Lord says in the prophet; With the hearing of the ears they listened to Me. And again He says; They who are afar off shall hear with their ears, and shall perceive what I have done. And; Be circumcised in your hearts, says the Lord.
9:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And again He says; Hear, O Israel, for thus says the Lord your God. Who is he who desires to live forever, let him hear with his ears the voice of My servant.
9:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And again He says; Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord has spoken these things for a testimony. And again He says; Hear the words of the Lord, you rulers of this people. And again He says; Hear, O my children, the voice of one crying in the wilderness. Therefore He circumcised our ears, that hearing the word we might believe.
9:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But moreover the circumcision, in which they have confidence, is abolished; for He has said that a circumcision not of the flesh should be practiced. But they transgressed, for an evil angel taught them cleverness.
9:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN He says unto them; Thus says the Lord your God (so I find the commandment); sow not upon thorns, be circumcised in to your Lord. And what does He say? Be circumcised in the hardness of your heart; and then you will not harden your neck. Take this again; Behold, says the Lord, all the Gentiles are uncircumcised in their foreskin, but this people is uncircumcised in their hearts.
9:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But you will say; In truth the people has been circumcised for a seal. No, but so likewise is every Syrian and Arabian and all the priests of the idols. Do all those then too belong to their covenant? Moreover the Egyptians also are included among the circumcised.
9:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Learn therefore, children of love, concerning all things abundantly, that Abraham, who first appointed circumcision, looked forward in the spirit unto Jesus, when he circumcised having received the ordinances of three letters.
9:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For the scripture says; And Abraham circumcised of his household eighteen males and three hundred. What then was the knowledge given unto him? Understand that He says the eighteen first, and then after an interval three hundred In the eighteen 'I' stands for ten, 'H' for eight. Here you have JESUS [IHSOYS]. And because the cross in the 'T' was to have grace, He says also three hundred. So He reveals Jesus in the two letters, and in the remaining one the cross.
9:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN He who placed within us the innate gift of His covenant knows; no man has ever learned from me a more genuine word; but I know that you are worthy.
10:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But forasmuch as Moses said; You shall not eat seine nor eagle nor falcon nor crow nor any fish which has no scale upon it, he received in his understanding three ordinances.
10:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Yes and further He says unto them in Deuteronomy; And I will lay as a covenant upon this people My ordinances. So then it is not a commandment of God that they should not bite with their teeth, but Moses spoke it in spirit.
10:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Accordingly he mentioned the swine with this intent. You shall not cleave, says he, to such men who are like unto swine; that is, when they are in luxury they forget the Lord, but when they are in want they recognize the Lord, just as the swine when it eats knows not his lord, but when it is hungry it cries out, and when it has received food again it is silent.
10:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Neither shall you eat eagle nor falcon nor kite nor crow. You shall not, He says, cleave unto, or be likened to, such men who now not how to provide food for themselves by toil and sweat, but in their lawlessness seize what belongs to others, and as if they were walking in guilelessness watch and search about for some one to rob in their rapacity, just as these birds alone do not provide food for themselves, but sit idle and seek how they may eat the meat that belongs to others, being pestilent in their evil-doings.
10:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And you shall not eat, says He, lamprey nor polypus nor cuttle fish. You shall not, He means, become like unto such men, who are desperately wicked, and are already condemned to death, just as these fishes alone are accursed and swim in the depths, not swimming on the surface like the rest, but dwell on the ground beneath the deep sea.
10:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Moreover you shall not eat the hare. Why so? You shall not be found a corrupter of boys, nor shall you become like such persons; for the hare gains one passage in the body every year; for according to the number of years it lives it has just so many orifices.
10:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Again, neither shall you eat the hyena; you shall not, says He, become an adulterer or a fornicator, neither shall you resemble such persons. Why so? Because this animal changes its nature year by year, and becomes at one time male and at another female.
10:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Moreover He has hated the weasel also and with good reason. You shall not, says He, become such as those men of whom we hear as working iniquity with their mouth for uncleanness, neither shall you cleave unto impure women who work iniquity with their mouth. For this animal conceives with its mouth.
10:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Concerning meats then Moses received three decrees to this effect and uttered them in a spiritual sense; but they accepted them according to the lust of the flesh, as though they referred to eating.
10:10:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And David also receoves knowledge of the same three decrees, and says; Blessed is the man who has not gone in the council of the ungodly–even as the fishes go in darkness into the depths; and has not stood in the path of sinners–just as they who pretend to fear the Lord sin like swine; and has not sat on the seat of the destroyers–as the birds that are seated for prey. You have now the complete lesson concerning eating.
10:11:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Again Moses says; You shall everything that divides the hoof and chews the cud. What means he? He that receoves the food knows Him that gives him the food, and being refreshed appears to rejoice in him. Well said he, having regard to the commandment. What then means he? Cleave unto those that fear the Lord, with those who meditate in their heart on the distinction of the word which they have received, with those who tell of the ordinances of the Lord and keep them, with those who know that meditation is a work of gladness and who chew the cud of the word of the Lord. But why that which divides the hoof? Because the righteous man both walks in this world, and at the same time looks for the holy world to come. You see how wise a lawgiver Moses was.
10:12:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But whence should they perceive or understand these things? Howbeit we having justly perceived the commandments tell them as the Lord willed. To this end He circumcised our ears and hearts, that we might understand these things.
11:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But let us inquire whether the Lord took care to signify before hand concerning the water and the cross. Now concerning the water it is written in reference to Israel, how that they would not receive the baptism which brings remission of sins, but would build for themselves.
11:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For the prophet says; Be astonished, O heaven, and let the earth shudder the more at this, for this people has done two evil things; they abandoned Me the fountain of life, and they dug for themselves a pit of death.
11:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Is My holy mountain of Sinai a desert rock? for you shall be as the fledglings of a bird, which flutter aloft when deprived of their nest.
11:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And again the prophet says; I will go before you, and level mountains and crush gates of brass and break in pieces bolts of iron, and I will give you treasures dark, concealed, unseen, that they may know that I am the Lord God.
11:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And; You shall dwell in a lofty cave of a strong rock. And; His water shall be sure; you shall see the King in glory, and your soul shall meditate on the fear of the Lord.
11:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And again He says in another prophet; And He that does these things shall be as the tree that is planted by the parting streams of waters, which shall yield his fruit at his proper season, and his leaf shall not fall off, and all things whatsoever he does shall prosper.
11:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Not so are the ungodly, not so, but are as the dust which the wind scatters from the face of the earth. Therefore ungodly men shall not stand in judgment, neither sinners in the council of the righteous; for the Lord knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the ungodly shall perish.
11:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You perceive how He pointed out the water and the cross at the same time. For this is the meaning; Blessed are they who set their hope on the cross, and go down into the water; for He speaks of the reward at his proper season; then, says He, I will repay. But now what says He? His leaves shall not fall off; He means by this that every word, which shall come forth from you through your mouth in faith and love, shall be for the conversion and hope of many.
11:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And again another prophet says; And the land of Jacob was praised above the whole earth. He means this; He glorifies the vessel of His Spirit.
11:10:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Next what says He? And there was a river streaming from the right hand, and beautiful trees rose up from it; and whosoever shall eat of them shall live forever.
11:11:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN This He says, because we go down into the water laden with sins and filth, and rise up from it bearing fruit in the heart, resting our fear and hope on Jesus in the spirit. And whosoever shall eat of these shall live forever; He means this; whosoever, says He, shall hear these things spoken and shall believe, shall live forever.
12:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN In like manner again He defines concerning the cross in another prophet, who says; And when shall these things be accomplished? says the Lord. Whenever a tree shall be bended and stand upright, and whensoever blood shall drop from a tree. Again you are taught concerning the cross, and Him that was to be crucified.
12:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And He says again in Moses, when war was waged against Israel by men of another nation, and that He might remind them when the war was waged against them that for their sins they were delivered unto death; the Spirit says to the heart of Moses, that he should make a type of the cross and of Him that was to suffer, that unless, says He, they shall set their hope on Him, war shall be waged against them for ever. Moses therefore piles arms one upon another in the midst of the encounter, and standing on higher ground than any he stretched out his hands, and so Israel was again victorious. Then, whenever he lowered them, they were slain with the sword.
12:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Why was this? That they might learn that they cannot be saved, unless they should set their hope on Him.
12:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And again in another prophet He says; The whole day long have I stretched out My hands to a disobedient people that did gainsay My righteous way.
12:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Again Moses makes a type of Jesus, how that He must suffer, and that He Himself whom they shall think to have destroyed shall make alive in an emblem when Israel was falling. For the Lord caused all manner of serpents to bite them, and they died (forasmuch as the transgression was wrought in Eve through the serpent), that He might convince them that by reason of their transgression they should be delivered over to the affliction of death.
12:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Yes and further though Moses gave the commandment; You shall not have a molten or a carved image for your God, yet he himself made one that he might show them a type of Jesus. So Moses makes a brazen serpent, and sets it up conspicuously, and summons the people by proclamation.
12:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN When therefore they were assembled together they entreated Moses that he should offer up intercession for them that they might be healed. And Moses said unto them; Whensoever, said he, one of you shall be bitten, let him come to the serpent which is placed on the tree, and let him believe and hope that the serpent being himself dead can make alive; and forthwith he shall be saved. And so they did. Here again you have in these things also the glory of Jesus, how that in Him and unto Him are all things.
12:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN What again says Moses unto Jesus (Joshua) the son of Nun, when he gives him this name, as being a prophet, that all the people might give ear to him alone, because the Father reveals all things concerning His Son Jesus?
12:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Moses therefore says to Jesus the son of Nun, giving him this name, when he sent him as a spy on the land; Take a book in your hands, and write what the Lord says, how the Son of God shall cut up by the roots all the house of Amalek in the last days.
12:10:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Behold again it is Jesus, not a son of man, but the Son of God, and He was revealed in the flesh in a figure. Since then men will say that Christ is the son of David, David himself prophesies being afraid and understanding the error of sinners; The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit you on My right hand until I set your enemies for a footstool under Your feet.
12:11:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And again thus says Isaiah; The Lord said unto my Christ the Lord, of whose right hand I laid hold, that the nations should give ear before Him, and I will break down the strength of kings. See how David calls Him Lord, and calls Him not Son.
13:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Now let us see whether this people or the first people has the inheritance, and whether the covenant had reference to us or to them.
13:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Hear then what the scripture says concerning the people; And Isaac prayed concerning Rebecca his wife, for she was barren. And she conceived. Then Rebecca went out to inquire of the Lord. And the Lord said unto her; Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples in your belly, and one people shall vanquish another people, and the greater shall serve the less.
13:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You ought to understand who Isaac is, and who Rebecca is, and in whose case He has shown that the one people is greater than the other.
13:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And in another prophecy Jacob speaks more plainly to Joseph his son, saying; Behold, the Lord has not bereft me of your face; bring me your sons, that I may bless them.
13:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And he brought Ephraim and Manasseh, desiring that Manasseh should be blessed, because he was the elder; for Joseph led him by the right hand of his father Jacob. But Jacob saw in the spirit a type of the people that should come afterwards. And what says He? And Jacob crossed his hands, and placed his right hand on the head of Ephraim, the second and younger, and blessed him. And Joseph said unto Jacob, Transfer your right hand to the head of Manasseh, for he is my first born son. And Jacob said to Joseph, I know it, my son, I know it; but the greater shall serve the less. Yet this one also shall be blessed.
13:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Mark in whose cases He ordained that this people should be first and heir of the covenant.
13:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN If then besides this He also recorded it through Abraham, we attain the completion of our knowledge. What then says he to Abraham when he alone believed, and was ascribed for righteousness? Behold I have made you, Abraham, a father of nations that believe in God in uncircumcision.
14:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Yes verily, but as regards the covenant which He swear to the fathers to give it to the people let us see whether He has actually given it. He has given it, but they themselves were not found worthy to receive it by reason of their sins.
14:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For the prophet says; And Moses was fasting in Mount Sinai forty days and forty nights, that he might receive the covenant of the Lord to give to the people. And [Moses] received from the Lord the two tables which were written by the finger of the hand of the Lord in the spirit. And Moses took them, and brought them down to give them to the people.
14:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And the Lord said unto Moses; Moses, Moses, come down quickly; for your people, whom you led forth from the land of Egypt, has done wickedly. And Moses perceived that they had made for themselves again molten images, and he cast them out of his hands and the tables of the covenant of the Lord were broken in pieces.
14:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Moses received them, but they themselves were not found worthy. But how did we receive them? Mark this. Moses received them being a servant, but the Lord himself gave them to us to be the people of His inheritance, having endured patiently for our sakes.
14:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But He was made manifest, in order that at the same time they might be perfected in their sins, and we might receive the covenant through Him who inherited it, even the Lord Jesus, who was prepared beforehand hereunto, that appearing in person He might redeem out of darkness our hearts which had already been paid over unto death and delivered up to the iniquity of error, and thus establish the covenant in us through the word.
14:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For it is written how the Father charges Him to deliver us from darkness, and to prepare a holy people for Himself.
14:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Therefore says the prophet; I the Lord your God called you in righteousness, and I will lay hold of your hand and will strengthen you, and I have given you to be a covenant of the race, a light to the Gentiles, to open the eyes of the blind, and to bring forth them who are bound from their fetters, and them who sit in darkness from their prison house. We perceive then whence we were ransomed.
14:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Again the prophet says; Behold I have set You to be a light unto the Gentiles, that You should be for salvation unto the ends of the earth; thus says the Lord who ransomed you, even God.
14:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Again the prophet says; The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, why He anointed Me to preach good tidings to the humble; He has sent Me to heal them who are broken-hearted, to preach release to the captives and recovery of sight to the blind, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord and the day of recompense, to comfort all who mourn.
15:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Moreover concerning the Sabbath likewise it is written in the Ten Words, in which He spoke to Moses face to face on Mount Sinai; And you shall hallow the Sabbath of the Lord with pure hands and with a pure heart.
15:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And in another place He says; If my sons observe the Sabbath then I will bestow My mercy upon them.
15:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Of the Sabbath He speaks in the beginning of the creation; And God made the works of His hands in six days, and He ended on the seventh day, and rested on it, and He hallowed it.
15:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Give heed, children, what this means; He ended in six days. He means this, that in six thousand years the Lord shall bring all things to an end; for the day with Him signifies a thousand years; and this He himself bears me witness, saying; Behold, the day of the Lord shall be as a thousand years. Therefore, children, in six days, that is in six thousand years, everything shall come to an end.
15:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And He rested on the seventh day. this He means; when His Son shall come, and shall abolish the time of the Lawless One, and shall judge the ungodly, and shall change the sun and the moon and the stars, then shall he truly rest on the seventh day.
15:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Yes and furthermore He says; You shall hallow it with pure hands and with a pure heart. If therefore a man is able now to hallow the day which God hallowed, though he be pure in heart, we have gone utterly astray.
15:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But if after all then and not till then shall we truly rest and hallow it, when we shall ourselves be able to do so after being justified and receiving the promise, when iniquity is no more and all things have been made new by the Lord, we shall be able to hallow it then, because we ourselves shall have been hallowed first.
15:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Finally He says to them; Your new moons and your Sabbaths I cannot away with. You see what is His meaning ; it is not your present Sabbaths that are acceptable [unto Me], but the Sabbath which I have made, in the which, when I have set all things at rest, I will make the beginning of the eighth day which is the beginning of another world.
15:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Why also we keep the eighth day for rejoicing, in the which also Jesus rose from the dead, and having been manifested ascended into the heavens.
16:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Moreover I will tell you likewise concerning the temple, how these wretched men being led astray set their hope on the building, and not on their God that made them, as being a house of God.
16:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For like the Gentiles almost they consecrated Him in the temple. But what says the Lord abolishing the temple? Learn. Who has measured the heaven with a span, or has measured the earth with his hand? Have not I, says the Lord? The heaven is My throne and the earth the footstool of My feet. What manner of house will you build for Me? Or what shall be my resting place? You perceive that their hope is vain.
16:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Furthermore He says again; Behold they who pulled down this temple themselves shall build it.
16:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN So it comes to pass; for because they went to war it was pulled down by their enemies. Now also the very servants of their enemies shall build it up.
16:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Again, it was revealed how the city and the temple and the people of Israel should be betrayed. For the scripture says; And it shall be in the last days, that the Lord shall deliver up the sheep of the pasture and the fold and the tower thereof to destruction. And it came to pass as the Lord spoke.
16:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But let us inquire whether there be any temple of God. There is; in the place where he himself undertakes to make and finish it. For it is written And it shall come to pass, when the week is being accomplished, the temple of God shall be built gloriously in the name of the Lord.
16:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN I find then that there is a temple, How then shall it be built in the name of the Lord? Understand. Before we believed on God, the abode of our heart was corrupt and weak, a temple truly built by hands; for it was full of idolatry and was a house of demons, because we did whatsoever was contrary to God.
16:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But it shall be built in the name of the Lord. Give heed then that the temple of the Lord may be built gloriously. How? Understand. By receiving the remission of our sins and hoping on the Name we became new, created afresh from the beginning. Why God dwells truly in our habitation within us.
16:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN How? The word of his faith, the calling of his promise, the wisdom of the ordinances, the commandments of the teaching, He Himself prophesying in us, He Himself dwelling in us, opening for us who had been in bondage unto death the door of the temple, which is the mouth, and giving us repentance leads us to the incorruptible temple.
16:10:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For he who desires to be saved looks not to the man, but to Him who dwells and speaks in him, being amazed at this that he has never at any time heard these words from the mouth of the speaker, nor himself ever desired to hear them. This is the spiritual temple built up to the Lord.
17:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN So far as it was possible with all simplicity to declare it unto you, my soul hopeth that I have not omitted anything [of the matters pertaining unto salvation and so failed in my desire].
17:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For if I should write to you concerning things immediate or future, you would not understand them, because they are put in parables. So much then for this.
18:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But let us pass on to another lesson and teaching. There are two ways of teaching and of power, the one of light and the other of darkness; and there is a great difference between the two ways. For on the one are stationed the light giving angels of God, on the other the angels of Satan.
18:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And the one is the Lord from all eternity and unto all eternity, whereas the other is Lord of the season of iniquity that now is.
19:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN This then is the way of light, if anyone desiring to travel on the way to his appointed place would be zealous in his works. The knowledge then which is given to us whereby we may walk therein is as follows.
19:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You shall love Him who made you, you shall fear Him who created you, you shall glorify Him who redeemed you from death; you shall be simple in heart and rich in spirit; you shall not cleave to those who walk the way of death; you shall hate everything that is not pleasing to God; you shall hate all hypocrisy; you shall never forsake the commandments of the Lord.
19:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You shall not exalt yourself, but shall be lowly minded in all things. You shall not assume glory to yourself. You shall not entertain a wicked design against your neighbor; you shall not admit boldness into your soul.
19:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You shall not commit fornication, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not corrupt boys. The word of God shall not come forth from you where any are unclean. You shall not make a difference in a person to reprove him for a transgression. You shall be meek, you shall be quiet, you shall be fearing the words which you have heard. You shall not bear a grudge against your brother.
19:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You shall not doubt whether a thing shall be or not be. You shall not take the name of the Lord in vain. You shall love your neighbor more than your own soul. You shall not murder a child by abortion, nor again shall you kill it when it is born. You shall not withhold your hand from your son or daughter, but from their youth you shall teach them the fear of God.
19:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You shall not be found coveting your neighbors goods; you shall not be found greedy of gain. Neither shall you cleave with your soul to the lofty, but shall walk with the humble and righteous. The accidents that befall you you shall receive as good, knowing that nothing is done without God. You shall not be double minded nor double tongued.
19:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You shall be subject unto your masters as to a type of God in shame and fear. You shall not command in bitterness your bondservant or your handmaid who set their hope on the same God, lest perhaps, they should cease to fear the God who is over both of you; for He came not to call with respect of persons, but to call those whom the Spirit has prepared.
19:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You shall make your neighbor partake in all things, and shall not say that anything is your own. For if you are fellow partakers in that which is imperishable, how much rather shall you be in the things which are perishable. You shall not be hasty with your own tongue, for the mouth is the snare of death. So far as you are able, you shall be pure for your soul's sake.
19:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Don't be found holding out your hands to receive, and drawing them in to give. You shall love as the apple of your eye every one that speaks unto you the word of the Lord.
19:10:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You shall remember the day of judgment night and day, and you shall seek out day by day the persons of the saints, either laboring by word and going to exhort them and meditating how you may save souls by your word, or you shall work with your hands for a ransom for your sins.
19:11:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You shall not hesitate to give, neither shall you murmur when giving, but you shall know who is the good paymaster of your reward. You shall keep those things which you have received, neither adding to them nor taking away from them. You shall utterly hate the Evil One. You shall judge righteously.
19:12:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN You shall not make a schism, but you shall pacify them who contend by bringing them together. You shall confess your sins. You shall not betake yourself to prayer with an evil conscience. This is the way of light.
20:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But the way of the Black One is crooked and full of a curse. For it is a way of eternal death with punishment wherein are the things that destroy men's souls–idolatry, boldness, exhalation of power, hypocrisy, doubleness of heart, adultery, murder, plundering, pride, transgression, treachery, malice, stubbornness, witchcraft, magic, covetousness, absence of the fear of God;
20:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN persecutors of good men, hating the truth, loving lies, not perceiving the reward of righteousness, not cleaving to the good nor to the righteous judgment, paying no heed to the widow and the orphan, wakeful not for the fear of God but for that which is evil; men from whom gentleness and forbearance stand aloof and far off; loving vain things, pursuing a recompense, not pitying the poor man, not toiling for him that is oppressed with toil, ready to slander, not recognizing Him that made them murderers of children, corrupters of the creatures of God, turning away from him that is in want, oppressing him that is afflicted, advocates of the wealthy, unjust judges of the poor, sinful in all things.
21:1:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN It is good therefore to learn the ordinances of the Lord, as many as have been written above, and to walk in them. For he who does these things shall be glorified in the kingdom of God; whereas he who chooses their opposites shall perish together with his works. For this cause is the resurrection, for this the recompense.
21:2:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN I entreat those of you who are in a higher station, if you will receive any counsel of good advice from me, keep among you those to whom you may do good. Fail not.
21:3:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN The day is at hand, in which everything shall be destroyed together with the Evil One. The Lord is at hand and his reward.
21:4:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN Again and again I entreat you; be good lawgivers one to another; continue faithful councilors to yourselves; take away from you all hypocrisy.
21:5:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And may God, who is Lord of the whole world, give you wisdom, judgment, learning, knowledge of His ordinances, patience.
21:6:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN And be taught of God, seeking diligently what the Lord requires of you, and act that you may be found in the day of judgment.
21:7:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN But if you have any remembrance of good, call me to mind when you practice these things these things, that both my desire and my watchfulness may lead to some good result. I entreat you asking it as a favor.
21:8:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN So long as the good vessel (of the body) is with you, be lacking in none of these things, but search them out constantly, and fulfill every commandment; for they deserve it.
21:9:6:2022:LIGHTFOOT_EN For this reason I was the more eager to write to you so far as I was able, that I might give you joy. Fare you well, children of love and peace. The Lord of glory and of every grace be with your spirit.
